Update and refactor CoC policy and processes (#1135)
openjs-foundation/cross-project-council: CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md

# OpenJS Foundation Code of Conduct

> ## Report an incident

Reviewer: IMO we should mention at the top where people can read our Code of Conduct.

Author: This document _is_ the code of conduct itself. Can you clarify your suggestion?

Reviewer: The Code of Conduct itself is not mentioned here, just the guidelines of reporting incidents. The actual code of conduct that is in another document should actually be included or at least referenced here.

Reviewer: Right, but it pretty much only explains the reporting pieces of our CoC, it doesn't mention the bylaws and the actual ettiquete and rules that the community should follow.

Hence, mentioning the remaining documents here, would make sense. We were using the Contributor Covenant, and we mentioned it here. Now we are moving towards an in-house baked guideline, but it's not mentioned anywhere within this document.

Author: We're still using the Contributor Covenant. CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md _is_ the code of conduct and _is_ Contributor Covenant. From the perspective of someone reporting an incident, little has changed.

Reviewer: I don't see any mention of the Contributor Covenant anywhere. I think its fundamental that there are mentions of the actual code of conduct.

How will people know what are the rules they should abide by? I don't see a mention of this anywhere.

Author: The content of `CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md` is (and always has been) the Contributor Covenant. I've just removed the reference to if at the top to avoid getting people confused between the version that we are running and the version on the Contributor Covenant website, as we've agreed to partially modify it and it's now only 99.5% equivalent.

Reviewer: That might be the source of my confusion here. Let's chat over the meeting today.

1.  To report an incident in one of the projects listed below, please use the method provided. The project itself is responsible for managing these reports.

>     * **AMP Project:** <code-of-conduct@amp.dev>

Reviewer 2: [](url)

    * **Webdriver.io:** [contact TSC reps](https://github.com/webdriverio/webdriverio/blob/HEAD/AUTHORS.md)
    * **Webhint:** <support@webhint.io>
    
    In case of a conflict of interest or if the report is not handled appropriately, you may [escalate the report][escalation] to the [Code of Conduct Enforcement Team (CoCET)][CoCET] by emailing <coc-escalation@lists.openjsf.org> or by contacting any if its members by email.
2.  **To report any other incident** (for example: in an OpenJS Foundation project not listed above, in a Collab Space, in the Cross Project Council, or during an event), please email the [Code of Conduct Enforcement Team (CoCET)][CoCET] at <report@lists.openjsf.org> or contact any if its members by email.

## Appeal

The victim(s) and offender(s) have thirty (30) days to appeal the decision made in response to an incident report if they believe the process was not properly followed. Appeals are not suspensive.

To appeal a decision, please email the [Code of Conduct Enforcement Team (CoCET)][CoCET] at <coc-appeal@lists.openjsf.org> or contact any if its members by email. TODO: make sure this email exists.

## Code of Conduct Enforcement Team (CoCET)

> The Code of Conduct Enforcement Team (CoCET) is a foundation-wide team established to manage code of conduct incident reports across the whole foundation (except for [projects who have opted-in][] to manage reports directly), escalation of reports managed by projects, and appeals to decisions made in response to incidents. The CoCET is currently composed of:

Reviewer 3: where do/will we document who selects this team and related info?

Reviewer 4: I was just typing in the same comment. It needs to be documented how the team members are selected.

Reviewer 3: it probably shouldn't be in the CoC directly - just somewhere linked from here :-)

Author: Yeah, I'm drafting this and figuring out the order of stuff as I go. It'll go in COC_POLICY and maybe a little in COC_PROCESS too. This is very drafty right now, tbh.

Author: That said, I do think that the members of the CoCET team should be listed in the COC (so reporters can reach out directly if they prefer) and that a line to explain what the CoCET is and referencing its full definition is thus warranted.

Reviewer 3: Totally agree; list current members inline, but link to full context/process/etc elsewhere.

Reviewer 4: I agree they should be listed, with a link to doc on how they are selected and approved.

    * **Node-RED:** <team@nodered.org>
    * **Webdriver.io:** [contact TSC reps](https://github.com/webdriverio/webdriverio/blob/HEAD/AUTHORS.md)
    * **Webhint:** <support@webhint.io>
    

>     In case of a conflict of interest or if the report is not handled appropriately, you may [escalate the report][escalation] to the [Code of Conduct Team (CoC Team)][CoC Team] by emailing <coc-escalation@lists.openjsf.org> or by contacting any of its members.

Reviewer 5: > What constitutes a conflict of interest?

Do we have some examples of wording from other CoCs? I am trying to think how I would write something on this, and it is hard to figure out what *isnt* a conflict in cases where we are all here because of our participation in projects or companies with specific interests. Thinking of the discussions in node right now, if "conflict of interest" included "being involved in any package manager project" then all the important voices would be excluded from any CoC violation discussion. Maybe that is good, but I agree getting this right is important and it would be good to have prior art to reference.

>     In case of a conflict of interest or if the report is not handled appropriately, you may [escalate the report][escalation] to the [Code of Conduct Team (CoC Team)][CoC Team] by emailing <coc-escalation@lists.openjsf.org> or by contacting any of its members.

Reviewer 6: On the topic of reports not being handled properly, breaking this comment out here as well:

The current text reads:
"In case of a conflict of interest or if the report is not handled appropriately...", so conflict of interest is part of mishandling, and perhaps the wording can be softened to say that if any parties involved believe the report has been mishandled in any way, for example, unnecessary delay or lack of communication..."

>     In case of a conflict of interest or if the report is not handled appropriately, you may [escalate the report][escalation] to the [Code of Conduct Team (CoC Team)][CoC Team] by emailing <coc-escalation@lists.openjsf.org> or by contacting any of its members.

Author: > I think it is possible to define the term 'conflict of interest' and not tie a general Foundation policy.

Absolutely. If there's a simple conflict of interest policy everyone's happy with, it makes sense baking it in right away. However, given we've lived without a formal conflict of interest policy so far, we shouldn't block this PR on it if there isn't consensus about the policy's content. I'm opening a new issue for the conflict of interest policy. If we have consensus quickly, we can pull it in right away.

>     In case of a conflict of interest or if the report is not handled appropriately, you may [escalate the report][escalation] to the [Code of Conduct Team (CoC Team)][CoC Team] by emailing <coc-escalation@lists.openjsf.org> or by contacting any of its members.

Author: > "In case of a conflict of interest or if the report is not handled appropriately...", so conflict of interest is part of mishandling, and perhaps the wording can be softened to say that if any parties involved believe the report has been mishandled in any way, for example, unnecessary delay or lack of communication..."

My understanding it that the concern isn't that people would hesitate to escalate, it's that the process might be weaponized against maintainers, particularly underrepresented maintainers, as we've seen happen elsewhere.

>     In case of a conflict of interest or if the report is not handled appropriately, you may [escalate the report][escalation] to the [Code of Conduct Team (CoC Team)][CoC Team] by emailing <coc-escalation@lists.openjsf.org> or by contacting any of its members.

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/openjs-foundation/cross-project-council/pull/1135/commits/93b246450818722ad179c528b928d30db3eac9c9. @bnb can you please check if the the proposed fix addresses your request for exemplifying mismanagement and resolve this conversation if so. Thanks!

>     In case of a conflict of interest or if the report is not handled appropriately, you may [escalate the report][escalation] to the [Code of Conduct Team (CoC Team)][CoC Team] by emailing <coc-escalation@lists.openjsf.org> or by contacting any if its members.
> 2.  **To report any other incident** (for example: in an OpenJS Foundation project not listed above, in a Collab Space, in the Cross Project Council, or during an event), please email the [Code of Conduct Team (CoC Team)][CoC Team] at <report@lists.openjsf.org> or contact any if its members.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
    In case of a conflict of interest or if the report is not handled appropriately, you may [escalate the report][escalation] to the [Code of Conduct Team (CoC Team)][CoC Team] by emailing <coc-escalation@lists.openjsf.org> or by contacting any of its members.
2.  **To report any other incident** (for example: in an OpenJS Foundation project not listed above, in a Collab Space, in the Cross Project Council, or during an event), please email the [Code of Conduct Team (CoC Team)][CoC Team] at <report@lists.openjsf.org> or contact any of its members.
```

> ### Appeal a decision

Reviewer 8: This section is weird, as it's mostly summarising content from `conduct/COC_POLICY.md#appeals`, but it's also defining from when the 30 days are counted, which isn't explicitly defined there.

Could this section be dropped, or replaced with a link to the policy's Appeals section? That would help deduplicate the text.

Also, the first "appeal" link doesn't work.

Author: Duplication is by design here, to offer a summary, in the CoC itself, for the benefit of reporters of their main course of action.

I think your below suggested fix addresses your other concern here.

> The victim(s) and offender(s) have thirty (30) days to appeal the decision made in response to an incident report if they believe the process was not properly followed. Appeals are not suspensive.

Reviewer 9: shouldn't this be the reporter rather than "victim"?

and is a "victim" a necessary component of a CoC violation?  "victim" is a loaded word, and may not apply to all CoC violations

Author: Fixed the language issue.

> shouldn't this be the reporter rather than "victim"?

Unless the reporter is themself harmed, I don't think they should have the right to appeal. They're not a party in the process, imho.

> The victim(s) and offender(s) have thirty (30) days to appeal the decision made in response to an incident report if they believe the process was not properly followed. Appeals are not suspensive.

Reviewer 9: agree.  I think it's better to refer to 'individuals' involved, and keep everything general to avoid characterizing anyone, especially erroneously, as victims, offenders, etc.

> The victim(s) and offender(s) have thirty (30) days to appeal the decision made in response to an incident report if they believe the process was not properly followed. Appeals are not suspensive.

Author: Fixed this by adopting CNCF language here.

> Harmed individuals and accused individuals may [appeal](#appeals) the decision to the CoC Team up to thirty (30) days after a response was provided if they believe that the process was not followed properly. Appeals are not suspensive.

Reviewer 3: i have no idea what "appeals are not suspensive" means; i've never heard this. Can this be rephrased?

Reviewer 4: I believe it would mean that if you appeal is does not immediately affect what you are appealing. However, I agree wording it differently would make it more understandable.

Author: Would: "Appeals do not delay or block the execution of decisions made in the response." Work for you?

Author: ```suggestion
Harmed individuals and accused individuals may [appeal](#appeals) the decision to the CoC Team up to thirty (30) days after a response was provided if they believe that the process was not followed properly. Appeals do not delay or block the execution of decisions communicated in the response.
```

> To [appeal][] a decision, please email the [Code of Conduct Team (CoC Team)][CoC Team] at <coc-appeal@lists.openjsf.org>. TODO: create this address

Reviewer 3: aside: it seems weird to me to have `lists.openjsf.org` rather than just `openjsf.org` on emails

Author: Agreed. @bensternthal, would that be possible?

Reviewer 10: I created coc@openjsf.org which forwards to  report@lists.openjsf.org

Instances of abusive, harassing, or otherwise unacceptable behavior may be
reported to the community leaders responsible for enforcement at
the email addresses listed above in the [Reporting](#report-an-incident) section.
All complaints will be reviewed and investigated promptly and fairly.

All community leaders are obligated to respect the privacy and security of the

> reporter(s) and victim(s) of any incident.

Reviewer 9: this should include the (alleged) offender(s) as well

Author: Fixed the language. Added your initial point as a task to complete before merging this PR. Marking this as resolved.

> harmed individuals and the reporter(s) of any incident.

Reviewer 3: after this is landed i'll remove all the hard wraps, consistent with #1116.

Author: Thank you!
